# yosemite-climbing-walls
Yosemite Valley glacially carved canyon hosts unique vertical geologic resources, like granitic domes, monoliths, spires, and cliffs. El Capitan (1000m tall), Yosemite Falls or Half Dome attract climbers and tourists from all over the world, Camp 4 is regarded as the birthplace of modern rock climbing. There have been numerous studies in the area, regarding rock fall hazards, landslides, and there is a map of the approximate climbing areas, but there were no public maps of the climbing walls. A map of the climbing walls would be useful for climbers to better understand the climbing environment and visualize the routes vicinity.
This project is an attempt to delineate the Yosemite climbing walls by creating a high resolution Digital Terrain Model (0.5m), from light detection and ranging data (LiDAR) captured using Airborne scanning. The resolution is a crucial factor in the analysis, lower resolution data would result in smaller walls lengths and less steep slopes, because the values would be interpolated. From the 3D model, we derive raster image files and extract the climbing walls: outline the morphologic characteristics of the ground surface (slope), identify the areas with steep slope above 75° and create a cluster of similar zones using raster image generalization algorithms. Also, we determine the wall length using a flow direction algorithm to obtain the main flow lines that cross a wall, and calculating the difference in elevation for each. With the slope and length data, we classify the climbing walls by steepness and length, for example from yellow to red (> 45° and > 100m difference in elevation, > 75° and > 900m difference in elevation). There is an extra suitability analysis in which we overlay subjective criteria (distance to roads, rivers, springs, parking) to find out the best climbing place.
There are still many methods to refine the analysis results and define the climbing walls or to obtain the wall length, correlated with on-site analysis. The project does not analyze the climbing walls in detail, because there is a lack of data from the ‘shadow’ effect that occurs when data is being collected from above the cliffs and overhangs (LiDAR data from the ground, or high resolution photos would be more useful for this kind of analysis). However, the overall result gives a better overview on the existing climbing areas and highlights possible new climbing areas, proving that LiDAR is a valuable resource that can be used with success to examine the surface morphology.
